---
layout: post
title: "Rspamd 1.9.1 has been released"
categories: announce
---

We have released **Rspamd 1.9.1** today.

This release includes one potentially dangerous change: all configuration files are now [preprocessed](https://rspamd.com/doc/configuration/index.html#jinja-templating) using Jinja templates.

{% raw %}
Hence, if you have sequences like `{=`/`=}`, or `{%`/`%}`, or `{#`/`#}` **anywhere** in the configuration files including even comments then you need to take extra care when moving these configuration to the new version! There are workarounds described [above](https://rspamd.com/doc/configuration/index.html#jinja-templating) to do that.
{% endraw %}

Here is the list of the most important changes in this version.

## Jinja templates in the configuration

{% raw %}

From version 1.9.1, Rspamd supports [Jinja2 templates](http://jinja.pocoo.org) provided by [Lupa Lua library](https://foicica.com/lupa/). You can read the basic syntax documnentation and the abilities provided by these templating engines using the links above. Rspamd itself uses a specific syntax for variable tags: `{=` and `=}` instead of the traditional `{{` and `}}` as these tags could mean, e.g. a table in table in Lua.

{% endraw %}

Templating might be useful to hide some secrets from config files and places them in environment. Rspamd automatically reads environment variables that start from `RSPAMD_` prefix and pushes it to the `env` variable, e.g. `RSPAMD_foo=bar` comes to `env.foo="bar"` in templates.

## New template subcommand in Rspamadm

`Rspamadm` has now `template` subcommand to apply templates engine to the input file or files:

Options supported:

|--
|-n, --no-vars |  Don't add Rspamd internal variables |
| -e <filename>, --env <filename> | Load additional environment var from specific file (name=value) |
| -l <filename>, --lua-env <filename> | Load additional environment vars from specific file (lua source) |
| -s <suffix>, --suffix <suffix> | Store files with the new suffix |
| -i, --inplace | Replace input file(s) |

## Changes in URLs extraction for HTML parts

Rspamd now tries to extract URLs from plain text of HTML parts. Unfortunately, despite of being contraversal, some Email clients do that as well. One of the notable example is Outlook. Hence, from this release Rspamd also looks for URLs in plain HTML text.

## Per user settings for `mime_types` plugin

[Mime types plugin](https://rspamd.com/doc/modules/mime_types.html) now supports per user settings to allow individual black and white lists of extensions. Here is an example to increase score for `exe` extensions for some specific user:

~~~ucl
test {
  from = "user@example.com";

  apply {
    plugins {
      mime_types = {
        bad_extensions = {
          exe = 100500,
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
~~~

Mime types plugin now also supports reverse mapping of content type to extension to allow processing of attachments where an exact file name is not specified.

## Better greylisting conditioning

It is now possible to disable or enable [greylisting](https://rspamd.com/doc/modules/greylisting.html) in Rspamd based on the presence of some specific symbols. This feature allows more fine grained greylisting control.

## Bitcoin addresses validation

It is not a secret that the wave of spam and scam related to crypto currencies has been flooding the email flows in the recent time. Rspamd has a special rule called `LEAKED_PASSWORD_SPAM` to block some of the scam types. In this version, Rspamd also checks bitcoin wallets to distinguish them from random long strings to reduce false positives rate significantly. It also allows to build a database of wallets used for scam and spam.

## Replies plugin validation

Replies plugin now stores the from/reply-to address when tracking outbound messages and whitelists merely replies that come that address. It helps to avoid replies abusing where spammers were able to catch some legit message ids somewhere in public lists and used them in `In-Reply-To` headers to dodge spam filtering in Rspamd.

## List of major bug fixes

This version includes some important fixes:

* Add crash safety for HTTP async routines
* Clickhouse: Fix table schema upload
* Core: Fix squeezed dependencies handling for virtual symbols
* Finally fix default parameters parsing in actions section
* Fix ES sending logic (restore from coroutines mess)
* Fix finishing script for Clickhouse collection
* Fix priority for regexp symbols registration
* Neural: Fix training
* Rework cached Redis logic to avoid sentinels breaking
* SURBL: Fix regression in surbl module
* Fix double signing in the milter

## Full list of the meaningful changes

* [Conf] Add vendor groups for symbols
* [Feature] Add `rspamadm template` command
* [Feature] Allow to add messages from settings
* [Feature] Allow unconnected DNS servers operations
* [Feature] Check limits after being set, migrate to uint64
* [Feature] Greylist: Allow to disable greylisting depending on symbols
* [Feature] Improve lua binary strings output
* [Feature] Mime_types: Implement user configurable extension filters
* [Feature] Mime_types: When no extension defined, detect it by content
* [Feature] Preprocess config files using jinja templates
* [Feature] Replies: Filter replies sender to limit whitelisting to direct messages
* [Feature] Treat all tags with HREF as a potential hyperlinks
* [Feature] Validate BTC addresses in LEAKED_PASSWORD_SCAM
* [Fix] Add crash safety for HTTP async routines
* [Fix] Another fix for Redis sentinel
* [Fix] Clickhouse: Fix table schema upload
* [Fix] Core: Fix squeezed dependencies handling for virtual symbols
* [Fix] Finally fix default parameters parsing in actions section
* [Fix] Fix ES sending logic (restore from coroutines mess)
* [Fix] Fix finishing script for clickhouse collection
* [Fix] Fix priority for regexp symbols registriation
* [Fix] Fix various issues found by PVS Studio
* [Fix] Initialize lua debugging earlier
* [Fix] Neural: Fix training
* [Fix] Rework cached Redis logic to avoid sentinels breaking
* [Fix] SURBL: Fix regression in surbl module
* [Fix] Fix double signing in the milter
* [Project] Add support of HTTP proxy in requests
* [Rework] Change lua global variables registration
* [Rework] Rework HTML content urls extraction
* [Rework] Start rework of aliasing in Rspamd
* [WebUI] Combine Scan and Learning into one tab
* [WebUI] Fix symbol score input type
* [WebUI] Show grayed out pie
* [WebUI] Update Throughput summary values dynamically