---
layout: post
title: "Rspamd 3.4 has been released"
categories: announce
---

We have released **Rspamd 3.4** today. This is a bugfix release with no incompatible changes. Several new features have also been added.
Here are the most important changes in this version explained.

## Main changes

### Sharing hyperscan database among Rspamd processes

 Hyperscan databases are now shared between all Rspamd processes reducing memory footprint, especially when multiple worker processes are running.

### Critical fix in the compatibility with the integrations and headers alterations

There was a critical compatibility [issue](https://github.com/poolpOrg/filter-rspamd/issues/41#issuecomment-1286604248), caused by the change in the `milter_headers` reply block that prevents some Rspamd integrations to be functional. In this release that issue has been fixed, and the compatibility with the previous output format has been restored.

### Fix additional fields in the Redis schema

Some fields were no longer accepted in Redis settings[issue](https://github.com/rspamd/rspamd/issues/4318). Now it works correctly.

## All significant changes

Here is the list of the important changes:

* [Feature] Milter_headers: Add `x-rspamd-action` routine
* [Feature] Share hyperscan database among processes
* [Fix] Another corner case in url parsing
* [Fix] Another fix for the enable password
* [Fix] Another try to fix close method in lua_tcp
* [Fix] Fix emoji joiner FP
* [Fix] Fix favicon.ico Content-Type header
* [Fix] Fix hang when close is used
* [Fix] Lua_tcp: Sigh, another try to fix `close` invocation
* [Fix] Mx_check: Cache the fact of a missing MX record
* [Fix] Try to fix parsing of the unencoded `>` characters in html attributes
* [Fix] Try to fix the case where password == enable_password
* [Project] (Re)implement hyperscan caching
* [Project] Rework cleanup
* [Project] Synchronize hyperscan caches via the main process
* [Rework] Convert multipattern to use hyperscan tools
* [Rework] Make http normalize path function a generic function
* [Rework] Split locked and unlocked files, as mmap does not need flock normally
* [Rework] Start movement of the hyperscan related routines into a single unit
* [Rework] Store the current worker, so other libraries could use this information
* [Rework] Use blocking socket for IPC between main and workers
* [Rework] Use more predictable size for commands buffers
* [Rules] Do not insert ONCE_RECEIVED_STRICT on RDNS missing
* [Rules] Reduce score of HTTP_TO_HTTPS - subject to remove completely
